Content for the upcoming AWS S3 CLI workshop (#21)
Arcadia-Science/arcadia-computational-training: docs/arcadia-users-group/20220919-aws-s3-cli/lesson.md

Some of us may already know how to interact with AWS S3 through its own user interface or using a tool like [Cyberduck](https://www.notion.so/arcadiascience/Syncing-data-to-S3-via-a-GUI-for-the-microscopy-team-bd7c106e648343d4ac01c2d5198b633c). While these options work fine, they limit the speed at which you can interact with S3 (they put explicit caps on upload/download speeds) and may be burdensome for large scale changes (think: updating 100s of files).

This is where the AWS S3 command line tool comes into play. During this workshop, we'll learn about two tools: the official [AWS CLI](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/reference/s3/) and [s5cmd](https://github.com/peak/s5cmd).

Command line tools may be intimidating but great news: if you attended the AUG workshops in the last 2 weeks focusing on shell commands, you already know the shell versions of all the commands (`ls`, `cp`, `mv`, `rm` etc.) that we'll go through in this workshop. So let's get started!

## Downloading and installing the AWS CLI

> The download and installation instructions for the AWS CLI can be found [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/getting-started-install.html). If you're on a Unix machine, you can use these two commands to start the installation process:

Reviewer: I think these are only the instructions for Linux/WSL? Would these work for mac too? The linked URL looks like the macOS instructions are different

sudo ./aws/install
rm awscliv2.zip
```

Once the installation process is complete run `which aws` to make sure installation worked as expected.

## Configuring the AWS CLI to work with your credentials

### Getting your AWS credentials to use with the AWS CLI

This section assumes you are part of the Arcadia Science AWS account. If you're not, no worries. I'll securely share credentials with you. For AWS users, detailed instructions can be found [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/id_credentials_access-keys.html). The summary:

* Login to the [AWS console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/).
* Click on your username on the top right and select "Security credentials"
* Scroll down to the "Access keys for CLI, SDK, & API access" section, select "Create access key" and go through the steps.
* Record your access key and access secret in a secure place (or download it as a CSV temporarily) and do not share with anyone!

Now we need to tell the AWS CLI how to use your credentials.

### With `aws configure`

Run `aws configure`. It'll ask for your `AWS Access Key ID`, `AWS Secret Access Key`, `Default region name` and `Default output format` one command at a time.

> Enter the credentials you got in the previous section for the first two settings. Our `Default region name` is `us-west` and `Default output format` is `json`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enter the credentials you got in the previous section for the first two settings. Our `Default region name` is `us-west-1` and `Default output format` is `json`.
```

It should look like this:

```{bash}
aws configure
AWS Access Key ID [None]: <YOUR_ACCESS_KEY>
AWS Secret Access Key [None]: <YOUR_ACCESS_SECRET>
Default region name [None]: us-west-1
Default output format [None]: json
```

### [Advanced] When working with an EC2 instance

This section is out of the scope of this workshop, but it is important to note: When working with an AWS EC2 instance you can enable S3 access by using IAM roles. Instructions for that can be found [here](https://www.notion.so/arcadiascience/Enabling-EC2-and-S3-connection-3d8b3b75441b49eaac1095eb66fbde97).

## Creating test data

Let's create some basic test data by copying the following commands:

```{bash}
cd ~/Desktop
mkdir s3-test
cd s3-test
echo "copy" >> copy.txt
echo "move" >> move.txt

mkdir sync
cd sync
echo "sync 1" >> sync1.txt
echo "sync 2" >> sync2.txt
echo "sync 3" >> sync3.txt

cd ..
ls
```

## S3 CLI command structure

The general structure of an AWS S3 CLI command follows the following structure:

```{bash}
aws s3 <COMMAND> <FLAGS> <SOURCE_PATH> <TARGET_PATH>
```

* `<COMMAND>` could be `cp`, `mv`, `sync` etc.

> * `<FLAGS>` could be something like `--dry-run` to display the operations that would be performed using the specified `<COMMAND>` without actually running them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `<FLAGS>` could be something like `--dryrun` to display the operations that would be performed using the specified `<COMMAND>` without actually running them.
```

* `<SOURCE_PATH>` and `<TARGET_PATH>` could be a path to a local file/directory, or an S3 file/directory path. For local files, the paths can be absolute or relative.

As an example, something like `aws s3 cp lesson.md s3://aug-workshop-demo/lesson.md` would copy the local `lesson.md` file from my computer to the S3 bucket `aug-workshop-demo` and create a file called `lesson.md`.

## S3 commands we'll work with

For all the following commands, we'll be working with an S3 bucket called `aug-workshop-demo` hosted through Arcadia's AWS account. For the workshop, we'll focus on a small but useful subset of commands, but you can find the full reference documentation [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/reference/s3/).

### ls

In the [first shell workshop](../20220906-intro-to-shell1/lesson.md), we learned that `ls` lists contents of a directory (**l**i**s**t). It serves the same function for the S3 CLI.

> Let's start with listing all the Arcadia Science S3 buckets:

Reviewer: How do we know that we're working with Arcadia Sci S3 buckets by default? Because our login credentials are those that associate with the Arcadia Sci organization?

Author: added a note

```{bash}
aws s3 ls
```

Now let's explore what one of these buckets looks like, starting with the `aug-workshop-demo` bucket.

```{bash}
aws s3 ls s3://aug-workshop-demo
```

If everything went correctly, you should see the `demo` folder under the `aug-workshop-demo` bucket.

### cp

> In the [second shell workshop](../20220912-intro-to-shell2/lesson.md), we learned that `cp` copies a file or directory. The S3 command also serves a similar purpose. Let's try it out by trying to copy the file we created earlied `copy.txt` to the S3 bucket under a folder with your initials. For me, this would be in `s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the [second shell workshop](../20220912-intro-to-shell2/lesson.md), we learned that `cp` copies a file or directory. The S3 command also serves a similar purpose. Let's try it out by trying to copy the file we created earlier `copy.txt` to the S3 bucket under a folder with your initials. For me, this would be in `s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/`.
```

```{bash}
aws s3 cp copy.txt s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/copy.txt
```

If you ignore the last part of the S3 path, it'll create a file with the same name:

```{bash}
aws s3 cp copy.txt s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/
```

Alternatively, you can give a new name to the file on S3:

```{bash}
aws s3 cp copy.txt s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/new-copy.txt
```

Let's see the changes:
```{bash}
ls
```
The file is still in our directory, it hasn't moved.

```{bash}
aws s3 ls s3://aug-workshop-demo
aws s3 ls s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/
```

Now let's try copying the `sync` directory by:
```{bash}
aws s3 cp sync/ s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/
```

That failed! This is because the `cp` command directly works with individual files. For copying folders, we need to use the `--recursive` flag. So, let's try this:

```{bash}
aws s3 cp --recursive sync/ s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/
aws s3 ls s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/
```

### mv

> In the [second shell workshop](../20220912-intro-to-shell2/lesson.md), we learned that `mv` moves or renames a file or directory. The S3 command also serves a similar purpose. Let's start with a moving example by trying to move the `move.txt` file we created earlier to the S3 bucket under a folder with your name. For me, this would be in `s3://aug-workshop-demo/mert/`.

Reviewer: How come a folder with your name now instead of initials?

Reviewer: oh i see, because you're going to move the file from your name dir to your initial dir later. Got it!

```{bash}
aws s3 mv move.txt s3://aug-workshop-demo/mert/move.txt
```

Let's see the changes:
```{bash}
ls
```
This time, the file is no longer in our directory. Let's check AWS S3:

```{bash}
aws s3 ls s3://aug-workshop-demo
aws s3 ls s3://aug-workshop-demo/mert/
```

Now, let's do a move within S3 by moving the file from `s3://aug-workshop-demo/mert/move.txt` to `s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/move.txt`:

```{bash}
aws s3 mv s3://aug-workshop-demo/mert/move.txt s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/move.txt
```

And now let's visulize it:
```{bash}
aws s3 ls s3://aug-workshop-demo/mert/
aws s3 ls s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/
```

The former folder is empty and the latter now has the `move.txt`.

> 

Reviewer: I'm curious if the mv section -- is there any danger in doing this? Like is it less safe for file integrity than cp, or does AWS do all the necessary checks like md5sums prior to deleting your local copy?

Author: Added a note on data integrity but yeah AWS does all the checks: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/topic/s3-faq.html

I still almost never use it though. I am a copy then clean-up person.

### rm

In the [second shell workshop](../20220912-intro-to-shell2/lesson.md), we learned that `rm` deletes a file or directory. The S3 command also serves a similar purpose.

Let's delete the `copy.txt` file:
```{bash}
aws s3 rm s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/copy.txt
aws s3 ls s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/
```

Let's try to delete the contents of `s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/`:
```{bash}
aws s3 rm s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/
aws s3 ls s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/
```

You'll see that didn't work. This is because similar to `cp`, `rm` works with individual files by default. For folder deletions, you need to use the `--recursive` flag:
```{bash}
aws s3 rm --recursive s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/
aws s3 ls s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/
```

### sync

> `sync` is a convenient command for syncing directories (local to S3, S3 to local or S3 to S3). It recursively copies new and updated files from the source directory to the destination. Here *new* and *updated* are important key words. If a file already exists, it'll not copy it to S3. Let's see it in action:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`sync` is a convenient command for syncing directories (local to S3, S3 to local, or S3 to S3). It recursively copies new and updated files from the source directory to the destination. Here *new* and *updated* are important key words. If a file already exists, it'll not copy it to S3. Let's see it in action:
```

```{bash}
aws s3 sync . s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/
aws s3 ls s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/
```

Now, everything is in S3. Let's try it again:
```{bash}
aws s3 sync . s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/
```

> Nothing happens! This is because all the files as they are on S3. Let's make a change to the `copy.txt` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nothing happens! This is because all of the files are as they are on S3. Let's make a change to the `copy.txt` file:
```

```{bash}
echo "new copy" >> copy.txt
aws s3 sync . s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/
aws s3 ls s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/
```

### Downloading data from S3

Our examples so far have been about uploading data to S3, but we can easily switch the direction of operations to download data from S3. The main change is the argument order. To download data from S3, we need S3 to be our source and local file system to be the target.

> Let's copy and move some data from S3 as a simple example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's copy and move some data from S3 as an example:
```

```{bash}
aws s3 rm --dryrun --recursive s3://aug-workshop-demo/fmc/
```

## [Optional] Advanced usage with s5cmd

[s5cmd](https://github.com/peak/s5cmd) is an unofficial tool to interact with AWS S3 through the command-line. In this section, we'll talk about the installation instructions and the differences to the official AWS S3 CLI. But first, why do we care about `s5cmd`?

### Why?

Great news: if your machine is configured to work with the AWS CLI, it's by default configured to work with s5cmd! It has two benefits over the official S3 CLI:
1. It's much faster. This is due to effective parallelization and bandwidth saturation. See [this blog post](https://joshua-robinson.medium.com/s5cmd-for-high-performance-object-storage-7071352cc09d) for benchmarking data.
![](s5cmd-benchmark.png)
2. It also is compatible with Google Cloud Storage (GCS) in case you have to work with any databases that are hosted on GCS (think: Alphafold).

### Downloading and installing the s5cmd CLI

```{bash}
wget https://github.com/peak/s5cmd/releases/download/v2.0.0/s5cmd_2.0.0_Linux-64bit.tar.gz

> tar -xvf s5cmd_2.0.0_Linux-64bit.tar.gz

Reviewer: Are these instructions specific to linux? What would the mac installation instructions be?
